Once around, diamond
planets. Diamond is of course a form of
carbon, pure carbon with the atoms
arranged in a three-dimensional
tetrahedral latice as shown on the left
there, creating a very, very strong
material. One of the hardest substances
known in the universe.
You can get other forms of carbon.
Graphite on the right hand side there
with its flat sheets of hexagonally
arranged atoms with gaps between the
layers is much softer. And you can wrap
that sort of structure around into a
sphere, so-called bucky ball,
football-shaped molecules, and make
other types of carbon that turn up in
things like soot.
But if we're going to make a planet of
diamonds, we're going to need a lot of
carbon. And we can't get it from the big
bang because the big bang left us with
just 3/4 hydrogen and one quarter helium
and a trace of anything else only. And
most of that was lithium anyway. So no
use to
us. So it is to stars that we have to
turn to get our
carbon. Stars begin by
fusing hydrogen to helium in their
cores. So nuclear fusion releasing
energy that resists the force of gravity
and keeps them stable for a very long
time. And larger stars are then able to
generate enough pressure and temperature
in the central core to convert some of
the helium to carbon. It's a difficult
process because you need to take three
helium nuclei and ram them together to
form one carbon. Helium is atomic mass
four. carbon is 12. So three heliums
make a carbon. You might think you would
take two heliums and make a eight
particle burillium nucleus. But
burillium nuclei are unstable and fall
apart again. Certainly burillium 8 is
very unstable
and you can only proceed in that
direction by taking two heliums to make
a burillium 8 nucleus and very quickly
hitting it with a third helium making a
carbon before the burillium falls apart.
But once you've made your carbon, you
can add a fourth helium to it relatively
easily and make oxygen.
And that's because oxygen is very
stable. It has a very good strong
binding energy as a result of having
eight protons and eight neutrons. And
eight in nucleophysics is a magic
number. It fills up a whole orbital
shell of nuclei. And uh the uh result is
a very stable nucleus for oxygen. And so
you can make carbon, but they tend to
convert quite a lot of it into oxygen
fairly
easily. For that
reason, hydrogen and helium are their
first and second most common elements in
the universe. And carbon and oxygen come
next. But carbon turns out to be the
fourth most common. You can see in the
logarithmic trace of
the element abundance of the sun there
that hydrogen and helium have the
highest peaks. Then carbon and oxygen
are sticking up in the next little group
followed by a gradual decline for all
the other elements and the pie chart
reveals it as well. Now this pie chart
is done by number of atoms rather than
by weight. So the 25% by weight of
helium um represents a rather slimmer
chunk due to the fact that helium nuclei
weigh four times as
much. But again, if we split out the the
sliver of everything else that is in the
sun, just 1.8% of the sun is uh other
elements and half of those are oxygen
and nearly a quarter carbon with the
other elements neon, nitrogen,
magnesium, silicon, iron, sulfur shown
there for the the other ones that turn
out to be quite
common. But if we look at the earth, we
don't have very much carbon. Our crust
is made of silicates which is oxides of
silicon bound to metals like aluminium,
iron, calcium, sodium, potassium,
magnesium and all the other metals as
well. And the iron in the core mixed
with nickel accounts for quite a
substantial proportion of that. There
are a few other elements mixed in there
as well. So, oxygen, silicon, sulfur and
so forth. But you don't see carbon
turning up in there
anywhere. Now this is because when the
solar system was
young, the disc of material around the
sun was being heated by the radiation
coming from the sun which had been
forming by gravitational collapse and
getting very hot. So there's a lot of
heat coming away from it even before it
kicked off nuclear fusion in its protoar
stage. And this protolanetary disc
around would have been subject to
fractional distillation. That's where
you heat a material and the more
volatile
compounds are boiled off first and move
to much lower temperature regions before
condensing. And so the interior of the
solar system was only able to have
materials survive in there that were the
least volatile. So the the metals and
the silicate rocks further out more uh
volatile compounds could uh solidify. So
uh further out you might get some of the
methane and the
ammonia coming back out as uh liquid
droplets and being able to be formed up
into planets and so forth.
And another way to des look at this and
describe it is to talk about the
distance from the star for different
things to condense out. So in the center
only minerals, rocks, metals and so on.
But if you go out beyond the point where
the temperature drops a little bit, you
can call that line the soot line where
carbon compounds such as um carbon
molecules, benzene,
napolene, bucky balls, bits of graphite,
and indeed bits of diamond could form
and condense out as a
solid. And then you go a little bit
further out, you get cold enough for
water and then ammonia and methane to
condense out further out. So the
distillation process creates these zones
within the solar
system. And so the Earth is well inside
that rocky zone and it uh the soot line
is round about where the asteroid belt
is. And we get quite a lot of
carboncontaining asteroids, the sea type
asteroids out in and around the region
marked there in red before you get to
the very water rich bodies further out
and indeed the giant planets where uh
even the hydrogen and helium could
accumulate. Now this is not always the
same distribution of elements in other
parts of the cosmos. Near the center of
the galaxy, we seem to see stars with a
much higher ratio of carbon to oxygen
and also in some of the globular
clusters. So, uh, our piece of this, uh,
universe seems a little different to
that which we find elsewhere in this
respect. But if you have a decent amount
of carbon and you're forming a planet
beyond the soot line, then perhaps you
would indeed be able to get a proper
carbon planet, one where there is more
carbon than oxygen as opposed to the
other way round. And this would form
where the protolanetary disc is rich in
carbon beyond the soot line and
relatively oxygen poor.
Um, now if you did have a carbon planet,
it would be quite difficult for us to
tell the difference just from looking at
the size and mass. Although if we did,
we could possibly tell that it didn't
have a metal
core. Uh, that would increase its
overall density. So somewhat difficult
to tell, but if you can study these
things with a spectroscope, then you can
get a good idea of what they're made
of. So the atmosphere of such a world
would likely contain lots of carbon. It
would contain
hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide, and perhaps even pure carbon
dust. perhaps bucky balls and soot
particles generally in the
atmosphere, but it would not have water.
And this would be because if there uh is
an excess of carbon, the carbon binds
with oxygen very ferociously turning it
into carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide
rather than allowing the hydrogen to
bond with it as water. And if the
hydrogen is then of course absorbed by
yet more carbon to give the
hydrocarbons. So that list that we put
at the top there. So lots of carbon
means those elements forming into the
list at the top and not forming water if
it's in excess compared to
oxygen. Then the body of the planet
likewise wouldn't be made of rock would
not composed of silicon oxides but more
likely silicon carbide graphite and even
diamond. Uh diamond on the earth tends
to form under huge pressure lower down
inside the earth and only get brought to
the surface by
uh deep mining of veins of diamonds that
have resulted from uh material being
brought near enough to the surface from
deep within the earth that we can get at
it. But on a carbon planet well it might
spew diamonds out of the volcanoes. So
carbonri would the environment be?
Wouldn't that be
fascinating? So have we found anything?
Well, if we look at the star Capernicus
55 Canry to give it its uh catalog name,
this is a double star just off the tip
of Cancer. The little red oval goes
around it. The main star is just a
little bit smaller than the sun, just
90% of the sun's mass. and a little bit
cooler at
5,172 Kelvin, but older, 6.8 billion,
sorry, 8.6 billion years old. Now, it
has a companion, a red dwarf star, 0.26
solar masses, and that may also be
double, but that's not really part of
our story. What is is the fact that
Capernacus the A star has a system of
planets and these have been given names
recently. They've been named after
various scientific figures. This was the
first solar system to be discovered
where you had an organization of a
number of planets all orbiting around a
relatively sunlike star. Hence the name
Capernacus for his uh discovery and
announcement of the heliocentric model
of the solar system. It seems entirely
appropriate. But the planets are called
Yansen, Galileo, Brahe Harriet and
Lipahe. You may have heard of some of
these. Um Galileo of course in
astronomy. Brahe as in Taiko Brahei who
did such excellent work mapping the
heavens and then we have Harriet and
Lipahe as well inventors. Um but I'm
going to concentrate first on the
planets and then look at
Yansen.
So this is an artist's representation of
those planets showing them in order. So
the innermost one on the left there, Y J
Y J Y J Y J Y J Y J Y J Y J Y J Y J
Yansen is a super Earth with eight times
the mass of the Earth. So bigger than
the Earth but not as massive as Uranus
or Neptune. Then we have the next three
which are Saturn mass planets of varying
density. You can see Galileo is bigger
but nevertheless the mass of these is
less than the mass of Jupiter. And then
the outermost one Liphe is a super
Jupiter. It's about three times the mass
of Jupiter. Being further away, it's
colder and so the envelope has expanded
less, which is why the radius is not as
great as you might
expect. But we're going to talk about
Yansen and 55 Canry
Eansen. Well, eight times the mass of
the Earth in double the radius. uh
that's uh fairly similar to the density
of the earth then because uh double the
radius gives you eight times the volume
and well you have eight times the mass
so quite similar in overall density but
it's orbiting immensely close to the
star and scorching hot on the surface.
The temperature is about 3,00 Kelvin,
enough to make it glow red, 2150 degrees
centigrade. And it was initially thought
that it was in a 2.8 day orbit around
the star, but in fact, proper analysis
and the discovery of a
transit or a series of transit events
where it was passing in front of the
star. So, we're lucky that these guys
are orbiting around in a manner that's
lined up with our line of sight was able
to reveal a very short orbit indeed of
just 17.8 hours, 3/4 of a day. And it
was the most telescope uh illustrated
here, which um I don't know, it reminds
me of Spongebob. Uh but there you go.
Perhaps that's what it was supposed to
remind you of.
So, back to planet Yansen. It was
thought originally that such an object
would have a hydrogen helium envelope
around it, an atmosphere, but actually
it looks more like it's carbon monoxide,
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, just
as predicted for a carbon planet. And no
sign of any water either. So, that sort
of backs up the idea. What they did find
was hydrogen cyanide in the spectrum of
the uh gases around the planet and again
pointing to the fact that there is an
excess of carbon. So this could well be
the first proper discovery of a true
carbon planet. Absolutely searing hot um
and uh thoroughly nasty place to to
visit, I would have thought. Uh but I
just wanted to answer the question that
pops out of this which is who is Yansen
anyway and Yansen was a Dutch spectacle
maker and there are claims going around
that he invented the telescope and that
he invented the microscope but I'm
afraid these are most likely a fraud put
about by his son later to try to grab
the credit. Turns out that uh Yansen
lived next door to uh a guy that
probably invented some of these optical
instruments and may well have pinched
the idea. Um and then his son put it
about that he'd invented
it. Now we also know that Yansen Senior
was a bit of a crook. He was arrested
for counterfeiting of currency um and
had to run away and then set up shop
again counterfeiting more coinage um and
got found out for that um and uh there
was a whole ha about it. So I'm not sure
we should be naming a planet after this
guy. But there you
go. Thanks very much for listening and
we'll be back with more on another
occasion.